RNA-seq technology and data normalisation

Basics of RNA sequencing
Wetlab - biological sample is processed in order to extract the mRNA from the cells. This RNA is then prepared in libraries which means segmenting the RNA molecules into smaller fragments and these fragment are then processed to sequences to get the nucleotides of each sequence
In silico - data analysis

Reads - short nucleotides sequences
Transcriptome

Principal Component Analysis
- assume normality or gaussian
- apply variant stabilization transformation
- find a rotation that spreads the points far away from each other as much as possible, rather than keeping them clumped together and hidden from each other.

RNA-seq: differential expression analysis
Comparison of mean values between groups: t-test
- the t-test assumes normality
- RNA-seq data violate this assumption
- RNA-seq distribution closer to a negative binomial

Additional issue:
- estimating alpha is not trivial especially for low sample sizes

Bulk vs Single-Cell RNA-seq
- in Bulk RNA-seq, we generate the samples or profiles by pooling together the mRNA of several cells. this means that the expression levels of each sample is the average of expression levels of all the cells
- in Single Cell RNA-seq, each cell is profile in isolation

Cell type identification
- naive
- memory

Q: Can the absence of differentially expressed genes be due to the presence of multiple cell types?

Representing scRNA-seq in Python

Structure of AnnData object
X: contains te gene expression values; gene expression matrix
var: data frame with information of genes
obs: data frame with information on cells
obsm: multivariate information on observations
obsp: pairwise information on observations

scRNA-seq pre-processing

Raw counts
Normalization
Log-transformation
Regressing out-confounders
Scaling

Multidimensional scaling: UMAP

PCA - not ideal for scRNA

MDS oepration
UMAP is the de facto visualization standard for single cell data

1. Estimate distance between obkects
2. Projection in a lower space

Cell type identification
1. Clustering
2. Markers identification
3. Comparison with known cell markers

BioAI - a-birds-eye-view

Skills and Toolbox. What's next?
A brief history (1990-2020)

BioAI - recent developments
1. Data explosion - sequencing, Genomics (single-cell, multi-modal, spatial), Molecular/clinical imaging 2014, 2015, 2018
2. Machine learning - current "new" wave since 2012
3. Bioinformatics / Computational biology pipelines increasingly becoming "automated" (end-to-end)
4. Advances in Computer Vision
- technique transfer - reformat "your" problem into an image representation
- direct application to images in Life Sciences
5. Medicine increasingly embracing these developments
6. Untapped, emerging opportunities across LifeSciences beyond the BioMedical Domain (plants, marine, ...)

Opportunities and Challenges